[WHOOSH]
[CHILDREN PLAYING]
>> When we are kids, we say
that one day we'll explore
the world.
Then we grow up,
routine sets in,
and we forget about
those childhood dreams.
But for some reason,
something compelled a friend
and I to follow this dream.
This is our story.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> That summer, I went to
visit Marc in New York.
We had not seen each
other in 10 years,
and at first it was like we
had nothing left in common.
I had just finished a movie
on water access in India,
and he was working
in marketing, trying
to convince Americans that
bottled water was a luxury
product.
But we ended up hitting it
off like in the good old days,
when we used to play in his
grandmother's backyard .
But this time our
playground was Central Park.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In New York, we were living
the high life in between
the high end restaurants,
the VIP clubs,
and the apartment
right on Wall Street.
Marc was living the
American dream--
the one everyone on
the planet dreams of.
But I felt he was
a bit out of place
in this superficial world.
So before leaving,
I left him a pile
of documentaries to shake him
up a bit and get him thinking.
- Me, I was perfectly happy
in my little Manhattan bubble.
I had landed a job
of my dreams, and I
had no intention
whatsoever of watching
Nathanael's documentaries.
But that's when life
called me to order.
One day when I was
pretending to be
Michael Jordan in my hallway,
I slipped on the ball
and broke my foot.
As I was stuck in
bed, I ended up
watching all those
documentaries.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> After that, I've got to
say, it was hard to get back
to work.
Especially since
at the same moment,
the financial crisis hit.
That day the whole
world discovered
that the greed of
a handful of people
was jeopardizing the future
of the entire planet.
I was now convinced
that the system
was incapable of providing
a solution to the problems
that it had created.
And as a water
salesman in Manhattan,
I was also part of the problem.
But what could I do about it?
I was afraid I might turn into
a cynic or fall into depression.
So I decided to leave
everything behind
and go search for the
answers to my questions.
I had no clue of what
I was getting into.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> At that time, I
was presenting my film
in a festival in New Delhi.
Marc just showed
up out of the blue.
He wanted us to make a
documentary about change.
I laughed.
What a crazy, huge idea!
But after watching
him for a while,
I thought it might be
interesting to capture
his personality
and his eagerness
to understand
everything on camera.
[MUSIC - ANDY BEY, "CELESTIAL
BLUES"]
>> (SINGING) We must get
closer to the essence of life,
but beware that it takes
courage and strife.
Expand your mind, don't
let it wither and die.
Come on and--
>> So, you like this?
[LAUGHTER]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> (SINGING) Come
on, contemplate.
Talk to the heavenly bodies of
the universe, of the universe.
>> After several days of
traveling, we met Anand,
an inventor of some sort who
created agriculture tools
facilitating the life of
the farmers in the field.
>> So this is the workshop.
OK.
>> You are welcome here.
>> Yeah.
So.
>> Anand and his wife were
looking after several ashram.
We are definitely far
away from the companies
quoted on the stock exchange.
But with these
collective work centers,
they succeeded in revitalizing
the local economy, which
had suffered after the
closing of the mines.
- [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Up and up.
Up!
>> We ready?
>> Yes.
>> Ready for the interview?
>> And what is to be
like Ghandi's follower?
What does that mean?
>> Gandhi follower means this
life is going on without any
driver.
But Gandhi is telling that
no, you have to be a driver.
People say sustainable
development,
so he has given [NON-ENGLISH].
You depend on yourself.
So for us, this
sustainable development.
People have forgot
the poor people.
And they want to be
rich, and rich, and rich.
And now I have heard
that America is
going to the moon for a picnic.
So this can't make
the world better.
If we follow
Gandhi's educations,
then the life is
slower, of course,
but full with happiness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH]
>> After our visit
with Prima and Anand,
we wanted to know more
about Gandhi and his views
on economics.
So we enrolled in
a seminar called
Gandhi and Globalization,
organized by Dr. Vandana Shiva.
This woman succeeded in having
several irresponsible global
corporations sentenced
at the International
Court of the Hague.
I had seen her in
Nathanael's documentaries
and I was eager to meet her.
>> Like I always say, Gandhi
for me is like a ventilator.
You know, in a room
where nothing is open,
everything's closed, there's
one little ventilator
from where you get fresh air.
And the fresh air of thinking
fresh is the value of Gandhi.
I mean, besides
what he did for us
as a country in the
independence movement,
but globally today, you know?
He allows us to think fresh.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And at some point [INAUDIBLE]
exporting water and telling
the people, like,
drain the local water.
But [INAUDIBLE] such nonsense.
>> Yeah.
You want me sitting here?
>> You can sit just where
you were this morning.
>> Oh, but your camera
looks to the side.
>> You know, I was
training as a physicist,
and I have actually done
a Ph.D. in quantum theory.
But I got involved in protecting
the forests of the Himalaya,
right here up in
these mountains.
As a result of that
I started to write
about ecological problems.
And the Ministry of
Environment calls
me to do the impact of
mining in these hills.
I was at that time in Bangalore.
And of course it's my home.
I was born here.
I do the study, and
the mines get closed
as a result of our study.
And I realized then that with
a focus and with dedication,
there was so much one could do.
And sitting in privileged
jobs, isolated from society,
you could keep making
excuses, but you
wouldn't bring the change.
So I threw up my
job, came back home,
started to work from
my mother's cowshed,
and that's what I've
been doing since then.
So things are
changing, but they are
changing in the wrong direction,
because the dominant change is
driven by giant corporations
who are turning everything
into a market and turning
everything into a commodity.
There are no people, there's
no nature, there's no culture,
there's no value.
The change we need
is a change that
helps us recognize
that if we continue
in this present path
of change, humanity
will annihilate the conditions
for its living on this planet.
Climate change is one
of those dimensions.
Disappearance of food
is another dimension.
You know, the corporations
have a very good agenda of how
to destroy small farmers,
but they don't have an agenda
of how will you get the food
when all the small farmers are
gone?
They don't know how
they'll do that.
So the recognition
that nature is
the condition of our being alive
is the shift we have to make.
We have to stop thinking
of nature as wilderness
and start thinking of it
as a condition for life.
[WILDLIFE SOUNDS]
>> Where do people begin to
make a reconnection with nature?
With food.
First of all, knowing
when it comes from
and making sure that nature's
contributions haven't
been abused by corporate greed,
which takes all these bounties
and messes them up with
pesticides, herbicides,
genetic engineering.
Food from nature
is healthy food.
But I think everyone
can be linked to nature.
If you don't have land,
a pot in your backyard.
A little kitchen garden.
A link with a farmer
in your neighborhood.
Every one of these are
connections with nature.
>> The second speaker at the
seminar was Satish Kumar, who,
in his youth, participated in
Gandhi's agricultural reform,
and had undertaken a 7,000 mile
pilgrimage to protest against
the atomic bomb.
>> Year 2000, I came,
there was nothing here.
Was about 10 acres at that time.
And Vandana Shiva and
I together dreamed
that this should be a learning
center where people can learn
about organic farming,
about caring for nature,
about making compost,
and learn about Gandhi,
and ecology, and environment,
and spirituality,
and education.
All the things which
you are witnessing here,
it all came out of a dream.
So if you cannot dream,
nothing will happen.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What really hit me during
this seminar was learning that
such a simple but vital thing
like exchanging seeds had
become illegal.
Here, like in many other
places, the major seed companies
had a bill passed prohibiting
the use of local seeds.
Then they introduced hybrid
seeds, followed by GMOs,
rendering farmers totally
dependent to the fertilizers
and pesticides sold by
these seed companies.
Since the passing of
this bill in India,
more than 250,000 indebted
farmers have committed suicide.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So she's telling a
story of 16 years ago,
when she first came.
Vandana was looking
for a person who
had a good knowledge
of seeds, and she was
the person with those skills.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> [INAUDIBLE] 500
varieties of grain today,
and 80 varieties of wheat.
So the lands in
Punjab, for example,
they are depleted because of
the overuse of fertilizers.
And it is also a health
hazard for the workers who
are working there because
the water is mixed with urea,
and it affects their skin and
it causes problems for them.
But he or she works right from
June to August in the fields
here, and since they don't
use any of those things,
she has no such health problems.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> And the most important
element of Gandhi was the right
to say no and the duty to say
no, which he calls satyagraha--
the power of truth, the passion
of truth, the force of truth.
When the British wanted
us to stop making salt
so they could have
a monopoly, he said,
we will continue to make salt.
We need it for our survival.
Nature gives it for free.
We will not obey your laws.
We have followed that
same logic and said,
we will not respect
patents on seed,
because you haven't
created these seeds.
We've received them from nature.
Centuries of
evolution by farmers
have given these
wonderful seeds to us.
They can't be patented.
We will continue to save them.
We will continue to share them.
>> Do you think we should,
like, try to fix the system,
or, like, to change the system?
>> You cannot have unlimited
economic growth in a limited
planet.
You cannot have infinite
growth in a finite world.
And so this system
cannot go on forever.
If it goes, it will destroy
the world and the earth.
You cannot go backwards,
because then it will create
unemployment and recession.
So this system cannot be fixed.
So we need to have
a new system where
you take from
natural world what is
your minimum necessity and your
requirement and your needs,
and when you have used it, you
return it back to the earth.
So it's kind of like a cycle.
That's how nature works.
You have leaves on the tree,
and then in the autumn,
the leaves will
fall on the ground,
and that will become
nutrients to the roots.
And that nutrition
will go into the tree,
and next spring it will
come again as leaves.
So we have to learn from nature
and create a cyclical economy.
>> We have got in the
world the ecology movement.
Some parts of it does
look at how you consume,
and very often only
promotes green consumerism
without questioning the
very idea of consumerism.
>> Exactly.
>> You know?
That the reduction of our
identities to being consumers
is part of the
problem, and recovery
of our identities as creators,
producers, makers of things
is part of the solution.
So you know, one reason the
[INAUDIBLE] is so important
is because that's where you
start to respect physical work.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> From consumer to
creator-producer.
It is then that I realized
that I had no idea how
to make anything with my
hands, and I didn't even
know how nature functioned.
Suddenly walking into fields or
sculpting something out of clay
seemed much more gratifying than
filling out Excel spreadsheets
to impress my boss.
[IMPRESSED MURMURING]
>> Very nice.
>> This idea that only
corporations can give us
livelihood, otherwise we
will all die and nothing will
happen, is complete
brainwashing.
Complete brainwashing.
The real employer and giver
of security and livelihood
is land, sunshine,
mountains, rivers, rain,
human communities,
our two hands.
We work together.
We have plenty.
We don't need
mortgage to live well.
corporations to give us
a few pieces of
figures on our computer
to make us think that now you
have something to survive.
You don't eat the
figures on the computer.
What is money?
Money is only an idea.
Money is only a plastic card.
Money is only a figure
on your computer.
Money is not a real thing.
You don't eat computers.
You don't eat figures.
Money is a means of exchange.
They are not the real security,
so people don't need to fear.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Overall, my vision of
another economy is every place,
people producing in
sustainable ways,
generating livelihoods
and meeting their needs.
Decentralized
economies everywhere.
It's a crazy world
in which everything
has to be manufactured in China,
and everywhere else, people
sit unemployed.
And because they are
unemployed and have no money,
the only place they can
shop is at a Walmart,
because they bring their stuff
from China and sell cheap.
What we need is to shift from
this idea of a false cheapness
that has very high costs
for the planet and people
to an idea of
authentic affordability
and low costs for the planet
and low cost for people.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Sun is shining, the
friends are sitting around,
we are chopping the vegetables,
the garden is growing food.
You have enough,
then you are happy.
Pleasure is when you
are seeking something
which you think you don't
have, and you want pleasure,
you want again, you want more.
You are always dissatisfied.
Pleasure always leaves
you dissatisfied.
Whereas contentment always
brings you happiness.
So happiness is when you
know that you have enough.
Huh?
>> Absolutely.
>> Absolutely, yes.
OK?
>> Good.
Perfect.
Thank you.
>> You are welcome.
>> Hope we are not too
late for the train now.
>> No no no, not too late.
Not too late.
>> Well, we got lucky.
We got one more talk out of you.
>> Up until that moment,
the preachy environmental
and political movements
had always left me cold.
But meeting people who
were truly inspired,
fighting for the respect of
life and the dignity of the less
fortunate?
That was a totally
different story.
They were not in it for their
own personal gain or for fame,
and I finally understood why.
Like Gandhi, their
actions were powered
by strong spiritual values.
>> You know, religion does
not have to be spiritual,
because now it's
increasingly institution.
And in our times
of deep insecurity,
it is increasingly a
political institution,
for political purpose.
And therefore it's
becoming fundamentalist.
It's based more on how to
hate somebody and less on what
to be yourself.
Spirituality is about
your understanding
your place in this universe, and
in that process understanding
that you are connected with
the rest of the universe.
Understanding
connection, and with it,
understanding responsibility.
Therefore, spirituality
is about deep freedom,
because when you
know who you are,
you know you're not shaped
by a Nestle or a Monsanto.
You're shaped by an amazing
creation of which you
are a part, and to
feel a part of that
is tremendous empowerment,
because this universe
is such a creative force.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The original idea behind my
trip with Nathanael was to make
a little movie about
alternative lifestyles.
But in just a few
days, these people
had changed my entire
way of perceiving
the world, the economy, nature,
and even my idea of progress.
Without even being aware
of it, they had totally
reformatted my hard drive.
>> For sure, I had not
understood everything about
Eastern spirituality, or
even about Gandhi's vision
of economics.
But suddenly the superiority
complex of Western society
seemed totally absurd.
Blinded by progress
and technology,
we had lost touch with the
essential things in life.
>> Enjoy this universe.
You enjoy with the
modern science,
but you keep your eyes also
on the spiritual science.
So you create a good balance
in the modern science
and the spiritual science.
Pleasure you can
get from the market.
Happiness you cannot
Happiness you have
to be looking inside.
Go deep inside.
Spend a lot of time.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> Once we returned to France,
we isolated ourselves to watch
the footage of the interviews.
I have to admit that I were
taken by surprise by all
the testimonials we'd heard.
The men and women we
have met were tackling
the root of the problem.
In their opinion, it
was impossible to find
a solution for today's
crisis without questioning
the commercial and
materialistic mentality that
had created them.
In France, a number
of thinkers have also
reached the same conclusion--
like this man, Pierre Rabhi.
Using ecological
farming, this philosopher
turned farmer has transformed
a rocky terrain in the Cevennes
region of France
into a natural oasis.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> According to Pierre Rabhi,
the separation of man from
nature is what led us to the
commodification of our world.
To understand how all
of this had come about,
we went to see the sociologist
and philosopher Frederic
Lenoir.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> At that point, my goal was
not so much to reconnect with
my body and with nature,
but rather to reconnect with
the workplace and the
world of business.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> My old employer was offering
me a position in sustainable
development.
If it had not been for
all those encounters,
I would have
accepted right away,
but accepting it felt like
I was negating everything
I had been taught.
The truth was I wasn't so
sure of anything anymore.
We had started down
a certain path,
and it was almost
impossible to stop now.
We wanted to learn more about
this disconnection between man
and nature, between
body and spirit.
So we decided to go
to Central America
to meet the guardians of
the ancient civilizations
and explore their
vision of the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In Mexico, we met
with Dr. Navarro,
who spoke to us about the
great civilization of Central
America.
After warning us about
the scams involving shaman
and psychotropic
drugs, he insisted
that we meet
Tenoch, a healer who
helps indigenous communities
preserve their traditions.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> According to Tenoch, a change
in civilization is happening,
but it depends on the
transformation of each
individual.
Those ideas were still
a bit abstract for us,
so Tenoch sent us
to see his friend
Marzo, who was organizing that
week a Temazcal ceremony--
a kind of Mexican sauna meant
to purify the body and the mind.
We decided to give it a try.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[SINGING]
>> Our experience took us by
surprise, to say the least.
It was nearly 150 degrees
Fahrenheit in that hut.
I couldn't leave.
In order to stay inside,
I had to let myself go,
and I glued my body to
the cool soil of the earth
to be able to breathe.
[SINGING]
>> As the chanting went on,
painful episodes of my life
surfaced.
I had to face my fears and
all the pathetic agreements
that we make with ourselves
that keep us from being genuine.
It was like a deep
internal cleansing.
Nathanael and I left that
hut feeling joyful and calm.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> After our stay in Chapas,
I started asking myself some
strange questions--
questions about my true identity
and how this universe really
functions.
According to various
Eastern philosophies
and certain indigenous
cultures, it's
a bit like in the
movie "The Matrix."
The reality around
us is an illusion
perceived by our five senses
and decoded by our brain.
The body is just a vehicle to
allow the soul to experience
this material world.
At this point, our film
was totally skidding off
the tracks, but this
theme of self-awareness
was too exciting for
us to stop exploring,
so we went to see
a mystic and asked
our questions about the
true nature of reality.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We stopped for a while
to see what was behind
the ta-ca-ta-ca-ta.
We took up a tough program,
including meditation, fasting,
and yoga.
We ended up hurting our backs,
but was a bit of practice,
we observed all those
uncontrollable thoughts
that poisoned our lives,
disconnecting the autopilot
to stay in the present
moment without judgment
or expectations.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Having just arrived
in San Francisco,
we left our bags at Liat's
house, who we met in Guatemala.
Our rational way
of thinking needed
to confront the teachings
of the ancient wisdoms
with the scientific
understanding of the world.
So we took advantage
of a conference
in the area to meet the
astrophysicist Trinh Xuan Thuan
and ask him a few questions.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> If science confirms that
we are all interdependent,
then war, famine, and the
destruction of the environment
seem even more absurd.
Not far from San Francisco,
the Institute of Noetic Science
has been studying the mysteries
of human consciousness
for more than 40 years.
Cassandra Vieten, the
director of the Institute,
introduced us to a
whole new point of view.
>> We're not not feeding
everyone in the world
because there isn't enough food.
We're not feeding
everyone in the world
because our limited
consciousness hasn't
come to a solution that allows
us to do that-- that makes it
a necessity to do that.
So many of the
problems that we are
facing as a species
on this planet
are grounded in limitations
in our human consciousness.
Inequity of resources,
violence, war, climate change--
they spring from the
way we view the world.
One of the projects
we're working
on here at the Institute
of Noetic Sciences
is called Worldview
Literacy, where
we're helping people see
how they view everything
through a worldview.
It's almost as though
they're looking
through a pair of glasses.
And their worldview
arises from many factors--
genetics, culture, religion,
how they were raised,
what they've learned in
school, the experiences
they've had in their lives.
And most of us are not aware of
the worldviews we're holding.
We think they're just the truth.
And so one of the things that
self inquiry brings to us,
one of the things that
contemplative practices can
do for us, is we begin to
recognize that our thoughts are
just thoughts.
Our beliefs are
just our beliefs.
And they are not
really who we are.
They're just sort of
working hypotheses.
So you may be, for example,
sitting in meditation
and find out, wow, I really see
the world as a dangerous place,
and that's been influencing
everything since the time I
was a little kid.
What if I didn't see the
world as a dangerous place?
And when that kind
of a shift happens,
behavior changes, thoughts
change, relationships change,
motivations, priorities,
values change.
And that's really the
kind of transformation
we are interested in studying.
>> While listening to
Cassandra in the woods,
I realized the beliefs I had
built my life on had totally
collapsed during that trip.
They had been replaced
by new hypotheses
like the good feeling that
the world is not just made
of matter, or that chasing
after money and social status
leads us away from what
is really important.
The problem was all
these new beliefs
were totally out of sync
with the world around me.
Everywhere I looked, I saw
messages inciting people
to consume and pollute.
I was turning into a
bit of a schizophrenic.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was time to
see a specialist,
so we made an
appointment with Dr.
Bruce Lipton to try to
understand how collective
beliefs take shape.
>> Different-- well,
I'll get the water going,
then you'll take the tea.
OK.
When I first was
talking about this,
people said, oh, he's crazy.
You know, you're crazy.
And now I say some
of the things I say,
and the scientists go, what,
are you saying that's new?
Now I'm boring.
The world as we see
it is an expression
of the collective beliefs
of the population,
or least a large number of them.
And therefore when
we look at the world
today in crisis and failing,
and science recognize
that the extinction
that lies in front of us
is due to human behavior, and
that human behavior has been
programmed by
culture, then it says
if you want to evolve
and survive this crisis,
we have to change
the belief systems.
Einstein's-- I love
the famous quote.
It's like, you cannot solve the
problems with the same thinking
that created the problem.
And the beliefs
are based on this.
There are three
questions they call
the perennial questions
that have been asked
by humans for 10,000 years.
How did we get here?
Why are we here?
And how do we make
the best of it?
The answers to the questions--
when a population
accepts the answers
from some individual
or some organization,
they also make that
individual or organization
the truth provider for the
rest of the questions of life.
The church said the
spiritual world is primary,
but science, especially
after Isaac Newton,
said you don't need to
have a spiritual element.
It's just the physical world.
It's like a clock.
It's a machine.
So when science
took over, it was
after Charles Darwin, because
Charles Darwin provided
the answers to the questions.
We got here through
random mutations.
Why are we here?
No reason at all.
Because it's an accident.
How do you make the best of it?
And that was when everything
went crazy, because it said,
oh, you live in a struggle.
Evolution is a struggle, and
to survive, you've got to fight
and you've got to compete.
So we bought a belief that
the world is not our friend,
that we have to go out every
day and fight for life.
So we bought that belief.
That's the world
we live in today--
the belief of the
material world,
spirit's not really
relevant, and that we're
in competition to who's going
to win and who's going to die.
Those beliefs have now changed
because the leading edge
of science has new answers.
So we didn't get here
through random mutation,
we got here through what are
called adaptive mutations--
the ability of an organism
to fit the environment.
And so every organism was part
of a collection of a whole.
There was no individual
organism showing up.
They were all created to
fit into the structure
of the environment--
the biosphere.
So we had a purpose.
We were here to bring
harmony to the environment.
And because we
haven't done that,
we are now risking our lives.
So the evolution is pushing
us to the next higher level
to recognize that
we are all one.
All of humanity is one
organism, and we are the cells.
And that when we fight each
other, we're killing ourselves
and we're destroying the planet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Every time the
answers change,
the previous civilization ends
and a new civilization begins
built on a new truth and a new
belief and a new way of life.
So when the new science
enters into the public,
then the public will have a
new direction and way to go.
But we're at the stage where
the old one is coming down
and the new one is being built.
And your work is part
of bringing the world
a new vision that
is more sustainable
and something that
will keep us alive,
rather than the
beliefs that we've been
using that are now killing us.
And so you're seeing an
evolution in process right now.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Finally, the
activists, the shamans,
all the scientists we met,
all had spoken of the arrival
of a new civilization conscious
of its interdependence and more
in harmony with life.
This new story was being written
by the Dervaes family, which
we had met in India.
In a garden a tenth
of an acre, right
in the middle of
Los Angeles, they
produce every year
more than three tons
of organic fruits and vegetables
with good humor and joy.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Here's water.
>> Well, at first-- at
first we were weird.
You know, because we didn't
look like we belonged anywhere.
We were out of step
with the modern world.
We were going back.
And when you go back,
you separate yourself
from those people going forward.
But then we became normal
with good press, good success,
and we started our own
business selling our surplus
to restaurants.
And we became well-known for
that, and now we're accepted
and people are copying that.
So I figured we were here
to take care of this planet
as our home, and that we
were stewards of the planet.
Not owners, but renters.
And if you know
anything about renting,
you don't trash the place.
If you trash your
apartment, you pay.
When you talk about
all cycles, this
is what you would do
anywhere you have is
if you have extra
greens and waste,
you handed to the animals.
They turn the waste
into fertilizer,
fertilizer goes
back in the garden,
and then you just do
it over and over again.
[WATER RUNNING]
>> We make it here.
Free water, they call it.
Working with nature is one of
the hardest things, because man
wants to control nature.
They want to
dominate over nature
and tell nature what to do.
And they say that the worst
mistake a gardener can make
is to think he's in control.
And the hard thing
was to let go and see
if we can work in
harmony with nature.
It was hard, OK?
But hard, it doesn't mean bad.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> I do another--
we have to teach
her, teach her--
>> I feel that the hope
is in the individual.
You don't hope
for the government
and you don't hope
for the corporations,
because they've got
their own agenda,
and you can't you can't
pierce their agenda.
But you can go inside
your soul and see what
you can do as an individual.
And in this day and
age, we are empowered.
We're not ignorant,
and that gives
me hope that some people
will see this as a solution.
Living the solution, not
thinking it, not talking it,
but walking and
living the solution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
[PLANE ENGINE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Marc and I
returned to France.
We were absolutely
convinced that a change
was about to take place.
All over the planet,
citizens were
aspiring to this new world.
And then it all fell apart.
The rebellions were crushed,
and the general unrest
and discontentment resumed.
We were wondering what was
preventing this new story
from being written.
To our friends who had regular
lives, we were dreamers.
We had no jobs, we had
no more career plans,
and no one to produce our film.
We felt a bit out of touch.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> By digging a
little bit deeper,
we finally understood what was
preventing the new world from
emerging.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> According to Herve
Kempf, the rise of finance
and of multinational
corporations has taken its toll
on democracy.
Instead of addressing
the real issues,
like the destruction
of the environment
and the unequal
distribution of wealth,
the experts in the
media continue repeating
the same three messages.
One, neoliberalism is
the best system there is.
There are no other alternatives.
Two, the world is in
trouble, but there
is nothing you can do about it,
so just let the experts take
care of it for you.
Three, growth and
technology will
solve all of
humanity's problems,
so consume and have fun.
Everything is under control.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We needed to
take a step back.
It was necessary to
dig into our interviews
to find something that would
help facilitate this transition
that seemed blocked.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> Renouncing the old vision,
stepping outside of the books,
and innovating according
to other values.
This is what Marianne Sebastien,
when we met during a forum,
is doing.
For the past 20
years, she has been
working with the marginalized
people of Bolivia
and helping them by integrating
personal development
with entrepreneurship.
This approach has allowed
the creation of a new society
based on nonviolence.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> All over the world,
ordinary people are changing
their internal software.
Their actions are now
guided by feelings
of altruism and cooperation.
Like the immune system
of our diseased society,
they are living proof that
a healthier world is well
on its way.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> We began with the idea of
[INAUDIBLE] like Gandhi said.
We will not cooperate
with these laws.
Not in our minds and
not in our hearts.
They don't exist for us.
We will function in the
commons of our biodiversity.
[APPLAUSE]
>> Gracias.
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> So the real challenge is
we have to have confidence
in our capacity as ordinary
citizens to bring change.
We have to recognize that
we are not atoms in society.
We are a community.
That means we start seeing
ourselves as relationships,
not as isolated individuals.
The minute you break
out of your isolation,
you experience power--
the power of togetherness.
And it's our isolation
that the dominant system
has constructed in our minds.
That is why Margaret Thatcher,
who brought neoliberalism
to England, said
there is no society.
There are only individuals.
It's vital for
global corporations
to reduce people to think of
themselves only as consuming
individuals.
We have to see ourselves
as creative communities--
the earth communities,
the human community,
our local communities.
And amazing power
comes out of that.
[APPLAUSE]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We had everything we
needed to finish our film,
so we went to stay with
some friends of ours we had
renovated a warehouse
in southern France,
and we began editing.
>> and then when we
fight each other,
we're killing ourselves and
we're destroying the planet.
>> [SPEAKING FRENCH]
>> After all this, I felt
much richer on the inside.
Unfortunately it didn't
matter much to my bank.
My parents were also
starting to get worried.
And now there was a
huge hole in my resume.
I started to wonder how I could
find a job that had meaning.
So we went to ask my
orientation counselor
Satish Kumar, who
teaches at Schumacher
University in Southern England.
>> When I go to universities to
talk to students, they ask me,
what do you advise us?
I say to the students,
I say, my advice to you
is that when you
leave your university,
don't seek an employment.
Create an employment.
Create a livelihood
for yourself.
So in employment, humans become
the instruments of making money
for the employer.
You are only a tool.
You are an instrument to
make money for your employer,
for your factory.
That's no good.
You don't want to change a
human being into an instrument
of making money.
Human beings are
creative beings.
Trust is the key
to good living--
surrendering to the
process of the universe
and trusting the
universe, and not
having this ego that I
will control every process
and I will plan everything
and I will manage the outcome.
You have to let things happen,
and you will be surprised.
There will be a miracle.
So trust the world, trust
yourself, trust other people,
trust the process
of the universe,
and be part of the flow.
When you are part of the
flow of the universe,
you will enhance the
universe, and the universe
will enhance you.
You will enrich the universe and
the universe will enrich you.
But trust is the key.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When I escaped from New
York to make this film,
I wanted to change the world,
but the world changed me.
During this time we
spent on this trip
meeting inspiring people,
rediscovering nature,
and decolonizing my mind,
I found some of the answers
to my questions.
But mostly I discovered joy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If I had to remember
one thing from all those
encounters, it's that in
order to make a better world,
we have to change
our vision of it.
And in order for this
change to take place,
we are all called to evolve,
because the real revolution
comes from within.
>> Yeah?
Yeah?
>> [LAUGHING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[MUSIC - ANDY BEY, "CELESTIAL
BLUES"]
>> (SINGING) We must get
closer to the essence of life,
but be aware that it
takes courage and strife.
Expand your mind, don't
let it fear and doubt.
You'll find it lifts your
spirit high to the sky.
So meditate.
So come on, let's contemplate.
Talk to the heavenly bodies of
the universe, of the universe.
We must get closer to
the essence of life,
but be aware that it
takes courage and strife.
Expand your mind, don't
let it fear and doubt.
You'll find it lifts your
spirit high to the sky.
Come on, mediate.
Yeah, yeah, let's contemplate.
Talk to the heavenly bodies of
the universe, of the universe.
Move straight ahead, people.
Come on, say move
straight ahead, people.
Come on and move it, move
it, move it, move it.
Yeah yeah yeah.
Gotta break free.
I want to break free.
Come on, come on,
come on, come on.